K3s review 22 (#1)
k3s-io/toc: reviews/2022-k3s-annual.md

# K3s 2022 Annual Review

## Table of Contents

- [Background](#background)
- [Annual Review Contents](#annual-review-contents)
- [Project Links](#project-links)

## Background

K3s is a Lightweight Kubernetes distribution that ships all needed components and utilities,
sans images, embedded in a single binary that weighs in at under 60mb (with compressed air-gap images adding ~150mb).

K3s is a [fully conformant](https://github.com/cncf/k8s-conformance/pulls?q=is%3Apr+k3s) production-ready distribution with some additional flavor:

1. Packaged as a single binary.

> 2. Support for sqlite3 as the default storage backend. Etcd3, MySQL, and Postgres are also supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Support for sqlite3 as the default storage backend. Etcd3, MySQL/MariaDB, Postgres, and NATS JetStream are also supported.
```

* [Kine](https://github.com/k3s-io/kine) as a datastore shim that allows etcd to be replaced with other databases
* [Local-path-provisioner](https://github.com/rancher/local-path-provisioner) for provisioning volumes using local storage
* [Host utilities](https://github.com/k3s-io/k3s-root) such as iptables/nftables, ebtables, ethtool, & socat

Additionally, K3s simplifies Kubernetes operations by maintaining functionality for:

* Managing the TLS certificates of Kubernetes components
* Managing the connection between worker and server nodes
* Drop-in manifest apply for all built-in and custom resources
* Managing an embedded etcd cluster

### Accepted into CNCF Sandbox

**K3s was accepted as a CNCF Sandbox project on August 19, 2020**

- Sandbox proposal [pr #447](https://github.com/cncf/toc/pull/447)
- Sandbox proposal [doc](https://github.com/cncf/toc/blob/main/proposals/sandbox/k3s.md)

### Alignment with Cloud Native Computing Foundation

K3s falls in the scope of [CNCF Runtime TAG](https://github.com/cncf/tag-runtime). We presented an overview of K3s to TAG Runtime, which can be viewed [here](https://youtu.be/ptoiC8fAPms).

**Key features added**:

> - containerd v1.6.x
> - RHEL9 support
> - MicroOS support
> - Increased focus on automated testing across multiple OS/configs
> - encryption key secret rotation
> - bootstrap reconciliation refactor
> - dual-stack support
> - IPv6-only support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- containerd v1.6.x
- etcd 3.5
- RHEL9 support
- MicroOS support
- Increased focus on automated testing across multiple OS/configs
- Secrets encryption key rotation support
- Cluster certificate rotation support
- Bootstrap reconciliation improvements
- Dual-stack support
- IPv6-only support
- Automatic detection of nvidia container runtime
- Automatic detection of systemd cgroup manager
- Control-plane egress proxy (similar to Konnectivity service) using existing agent websocket tunnel
```

## Annual Review Contents

### Include a link to your project’s devstats page.
Here is a link to our devstats page: https://k3s.devstats.cncf.io/d/8/dashboards?orgId=1&refresh=15m

Github specific stats:

| Statistic | Sandbox | 2021 | 2022 | 
| -- | -- | -- | -- |
| [GitHub Stars](https://github.com/k3s-io/k3s/stargazers) | ~14k | ~18k | ~21k | 
| [Commits](https://github.com/k3s-io/k3s/commits/master) | ~75/month | ~65/month | [~100/month](https://github.com/k3s-io/k3s/pulse/monthly)  |
| [Merged PRs](https://github.com/k3s-io/k3s/pulls) | ~35/month | ~45/month | [~66/month](https://github.com/k3s-io/k3s/pulse/monthly)  | 

> | [Releases (cumulative)](https://github.com/k3s-io/k3s/releases) | 100 | 171 | ?? |

Reviewer 2: What ?? did we decide

Author: still figuring this out, will either re-tool the previous ones, or put in the output of `gh release list -R k3s-io/k3s |wc -l` which is *455*

Author: Fixed

- Keeping our house in order
  - Improved framework and documentation for adding unit, integration, smoke, and end-to-end tests
  - Publishing weekly status and accomplishment reports
  - Enabled and curated GitHub Discussions for better distinction between questions and issues
  - Move k3s docs to [docs.k3s.io](http://docs.k3s.io), built on Docusaurus and served via GitHub Pages (no longer on SUSE Infrastructure)
  - Move [k3s.io website](http://k3s.io) onto Docusaurus/GitHub Pages (no longer on SUSE Infrastructure)
  - Continued focus on adding CI tests and improvements
  - Contributor process quality of life improvements
    - Issue and PR templates
    - Stalebot integration
  - Implemented [ADR](https://github.com/k3s-io/k3s/tree/master/docs/adrs) (Architecture Design Record) processes to add transparency and accountability to product design decisions 
  - Maintained and improved release cadence with upstream Kubernetes
    - 3-4 scheduled patch releases a month
    - Minor (aka feature) release once every 3-4 months

> - Features and fixes

Reviewer: does this duplicate the section up above?
